# Lecture 1: Course Introduction & Relational Model

A data model is a collection of concepts for describing the data in a database. 

A schema is a description of a particular collection of data, using a given data model.

---
## 1- DATA MODEL 

- Relational       // most DBMS
- Key/Value        // nosql
- Graph               // nosql
- Document        // nosql
- Column-family       // nosql
- Array / Matrix   // used in machine learning
- Hierarchical    // rare/legacy apps
- Network        // rare/legacy apps

---
## 2- Relational Model

In 1970 the relational model was invented to avoid rewriting DBMSs every time they wanted to change the physical layer. 

This relational model has three key points:
- Store database in simple data structures (relations).
- Access data through high-level language.
- Physical storage left up to implementation.

The relational data model defines three concepts:

- **Structure:** The definition of relations and their contents. This is the attributes the relations have and the values that those attributes can hold.
- **Integrity:** Ensure the database’s contents satisfy constraints. An example constraint would be that
any value for the year attribute has to be a number.
- **Manipulation:** How to access and modify a database’s contents.

A **relation** AKA **Table** is an unordered set that contains the relationship of attributes that represent entities. 

Since the relationships are unordered, the DBMS can store them in any way it wants, allowing for optimization.

A **tuple** AKA **record** or **row** is a set of attribute values (also known as its domain) in the relation. Originally, values had to be atomic or scalar, but now values can also be lists or nested data structures.

Every attribute can be a special value, NULL, which means for a given tuple the attribute is undefined.

A relation with n attributes is called an n-ary relation.

### Keys
A relation’s **primary key** uniquely identifies a single tuple. Some DBMSs automatically create an `internal primary key` if you do not define one. 
A lot of DBMSs have support for autogenerated keys so an application does not have to manually increment the keys.

A **foreign key** specifies that an attribute from one relation has to map to a tuple in another relation.

---
## 3- Data Manipulation Languages (DMLs)

A language to store and retrieve information from a database. 
There are two classes of languages for this:
- **Procedural:** The query specifies the (high-level) strategy the DBMS should use to find the desired result. `Relational Algebra`
- **Non-Procedural:** The query specifies only what data is wanted and not how to find it. `Relational Calculus` => this will going to be important for query optimization.
  
---
## 4- Relational Algebra

**Relational Algebra** is a set of fundamental operations to retrieve and manipulate tuples in a relation. 
Each operator takes in one or more relations as inputs, and outputs a new relation. To write queries we can `“chain”` these operators together to create more complex operations.

**Select**

Select takes in a relation and outputs a subset of the tuples from that relation that satisfy a selection predicate.
The predicate acts like a filter, and we can combine multiple predicates using conjunctions and disjunctions.

Syntax: **σ** predicate **(R)**.

**Projection**

Projection takes in a relation and outputs a relation with tuples that contain only specifed attributes. You can rearrange the ordering of the attributes in the input relation as well as manipulate the values.

Syntax: **π** A1,A2,. . . ,An **(R)**.

`WHERE` operator in SQL.

**Union**

Union takes in two relations and outputs a relation that contains all tuples that appear in at least one of the input relations. 
*Note: The two input relations have to have the exact same atttributes.*

Syntax: (R **∪** S).

`UNION ALL` operator in SQL.

**Intersection**

Intersection takes in two relations and outputs a relation that contains all tuples that appear both of the input relations. 

*Note: The two input relations have to have the exact same atttributes.*

Syntax: (R **∩** S).

`INTERSECT` operator in SQL.

**Difference**

Difference takes in two relations and outputs a relation that contains all tuples that appear in the first relation but not the second relation. 

*Note: The two input relations have to have the exact same atttributes.*
Syntax: (R **−** S).

`EXCEPT` operator in SQL.

**Product**

Product takes in two relations and outputs a relation that contains all possible combinations for tuples from the input relations.
Syntax: (R **×** S).

`CROSS JOIN` operator in SQL, examples: `SELECT * FROM R CROSS JOIN S;` or `SELECT * FROM R, S`.

**Join**

Join takes in two relations and outputs a relation that contains all the tuples that are a combination of two tuples where for each attribute that the two relations share, the values for that attrubite of both tuples is the same.

Syntax: (R **./** S).
`NATURAL JOIN` operator in SQL, example: `SELECT * FROM R NATURAL JOIN S`.

### Extra Operators

- Rename **(ρ)**
- Assignment **(R←S)**
- Duplicate Elimination **(δ)**
- Aggregation **(γ)**
- Sorting **(τ)**
- Division **(R÷S)**

---
## 5- Observation

Relational algebra is a `procedural language` because it defines the high level-steps of how to compute a
query. For example, `σb id=102(R ./ S)` is saying to first do the join of R and S and then do the select,
whereas `(R ./ (σb id=102(S)))` will do the select on S first, and then do the join. These two statements will actually produce the same answer, but if there is only 1 tuple in S with b id=102 out of a billion tuples, then `(R ./ (σb id=102(S)))` will be significantly faster than `σb id=102(R ./ S)`.

A better approach is to say the result you want, and let the DBMS decide the steps it wants to take to compute the query. 

SQL will do exactly this, and it is the de facto standard for writing queries on relational model databases.